"My uncle, of the worthiest mind,
When taken ill beyond a joke,
Enforced respect of every kind,
And better plan could not evoke.
His cue may serve as a direction;
But, O my God, what a dejection
To sit with sick folks night and day,
Nor step a single inch away!
What deceitful base behavior
To entertain a half-alive,
To set his pillows, to contrive
Sad medicine to bring your savior,
To sigh, and think in deep distress:
'When will the Devil take you, yes?'"
Thus thought a youth in wild career,
In post-chaise flying through the dust,
By the decree of Zeus, sole heir
To all his kin and their entrust.
Friends of Ludmila and Ruslan!
With the hero of my plan,
Without prefaces, this very hour,
Allow me to exert my power:
Onegin, my good friend and mate,
Was born upon the Neva's side,
Where you, perhaps, were born in pride,
Or shone in fashionable state;
There I once walked in days of yore:
Though northern air I bear no more.
Having served well, nobility-style,
His father lived on debts alone,
Gave three grand balls a year meanwhile,
And went broke completely, prone.
Fate guarded Eugene with its hand:
At first Madame kept him in grand
And gentle care; Monsieur replaced her.
The child was wild, but charming, sweeter.
Monsieur l'Abbé, a Frenchman poor,
Lest the child be worn out, played,
Taught him everything in shade
And joke, without strict morals pure,
Chid lightly for a prankish crime,
And took to Summer Garden time.
When to the age of stormy youth
Did Eugene finally arrive,
Age of sweet grief and hopeful truth,
Monsieur was driven from the drive.
Now my Onegin is in freedom;
Hair cut in fashion's latest kingdom,
Dressed like a London dandy bright —
And at long last he saw the light.
In French he could converse complete,
And write as well; danced with delight
The mazurka lightly and light,
And bowed without restraint or feat;
What more d'you want? The world opined
He was most charming and refined.
We all have learned a little bit
Of something and somehow or other,
So with upbringing, God be it,
To shine is easy for a brother.
Onegin was, by judgment strict
Of critics who were firm and picked,
A learned fellow, yet pedantic:
He possessed a talent frantic
Without constraint in conversation
To touch on everything quite light,
With learned air of expert bright
Keep silent in a grave debate's station,
And make the ladies smile or beam
With sudden epigram's bright gleam.
Latin has gone from fashion now:
So, if the truth I must declare,
He knew enough of Latin row
To read an epigraph with care,
To talk of Juvenal a trace,
Put 'vale' at the letter's place,
And remembered, though not without flaw,
Two lines of Aeneid from memory's drawer.
He had no wish or inclination
To dig in chronological rust
Of earth's historical dust:
Yet anecdotes of past nation
From Romulus unto our days
He kept in memory's deep rays.
Lacking high passion to bestow
One's life for sounds of poetic art,
He could not iamb from trochee know,
No matter how we tried our part.
He scolded Homer, Theocritus;
Instead read Adam Smith, ambitious,
And was a deep economist,
That is, he could assess the list
Of how a state grows rich and great,
And what it lives on, and why gold
Is never needed, we are told,
When simple produce is its state.
His father could not understand
And mortgaged all his legacy land.
All else that Eugene knew and retained
I have no time to tell anew;
But where a genius true he reigned,
What better than all science he knew,
What was from early youth his trade,
His labor, torment, and delight displayed,
What occupied the entire day
His languid idleness away, —
Was the science of the tender passion,
Which Ovid sang in Roman art,
For which he ended with broken heart
In Moldavia's lonely fashion,
Far from his Italy's warm shore,
In steppes remote forevermore.
How early could he hypocrize,
Conceal a hope, show jealousy,
Disarm belief, or advertise
Despair, seem gloomy, languidly,
Appear submissive or proud-browed,
Attentive or indifferent, vowed!
How languidly he kept his peace,
How fiery eloquent, without cease,
How careless in his love-letters!
Breathing one thought, loving one key,
How well he could forget his self-plea!
How quick and tender was his gaze,
Shy, daring, and at times in haze
Shone with a obedient tear!
How well he could seem new and clear,
Amaze innocence with a jest,
Frighten with ready grief professed,
Amuse with pleasing flattery's tear,
Catch moments of sweet tenderness,
Conquer prejudices of youth's dress
By intellect and passion's light,
Wait for involuntary caress tight,
Beg and demand a confession sweet,
Overhear the heart's first sound and beat,
Pursue love, and then suddenly...
Obtain a secret meeting free,
And after, in the quiet shade,
Give lessons to the timid maid!
How early could he stir the heart
Of well-known coquettes in the town!
When he desired to destroy apart
His rivals with a scathing frown,
How maliciously he'd slander!
What nets he prepared with candor!
Yet you, blest husbands, stayed his friends:
The sly spouse stroked him for his ends,
An old disciple of Faublas,
The suspicious old man in the glass,
And the majestic cuckold too,
Always pleased with himself anew,
Pleased with his dinner and his wife.
He'd be in bed yet, in his life,
When notes were brought to him in bed.
What? Invitations? Yes, indeed,
Three houses call to night's dark thread:
A ball is there, a children's party.
Where will my rogue dash off so hearty?
Whom will he start with? All the same:
To get everywhere is no hard game.
Meanwhile, in morning dress attired,
In broad bolivar top-hat raised,
Onegin drives to boulevard praised,
And walks at liberty desired,
Until the tireless watch's chime
Tells him it is his dinner time.
It's dark already: in sleigh he sits.
"Make way, make way!" the cry resounds;
With frosty dust, in silver fits,
His beaver collar shines in bounds.
To Talon he sped: he's sure and bound
That Kaverin is already found.
Entered: the cork flies to the ceiling,
Comet wine spurts with bright feeling;
Before him bloody roast-beef lies,
And truffles, youth's luxurious prize,
French cooking's finest, best selection,
And Strasbourg pie indestructible,
Between Limburger cheese delectable
And golden pineapple's perfection.
More glasses ask for thirst to drown
The hot fat of the cutlets bright,
But Breguet's chime brings to the town
News that a new ballet's in sight.
The theater's harsh legislator,
Inconstant adorer and spectator
Of actresses charming and fair,
Honorary citizen backstage there,
Onegin flew to theater hall,
Where everyone, breathing freedom's air,
Is ready to applaud entrechat rare,
Hiss Phaedra, Cleopatra all,
Call Moina out (for no other cause
Than just to hear their own applause).
Enchanted realm! In days of old,
Fonvizin, bold satiric lord,
Shone there, freedom's friend untold,
And Kniazhnin, quick to copy word;
There Ozerov shared involuntary toll
Of public tears and clapping's roll
With young Semenova's bright grace;
There our Katenin did replace
Corneille's majestic genius grand;
There sharp Shakhovskoy brought to light
His noisy comedies in flight;
There Didelot was crowned in land;
There, there beneath backstage's shade
My early youthful days were made.
My goddesses! Where are you now?
Heard ye my mournful voice and plea?
Are you the same? Or other maidens how
Replaced, but not succeeded ye?
Shall I hear your choirs once again?
Shall I behold Russian Terpsichore's strain
Soul-inspired, soaring flight?
Or shall my gloomy eye alight
No familiar faces on stage so drear,
And, aiming at an alien space
A lorgnette filled with cold disgrace,
Indifferent viewer of cheer,
Silently shall I yawn away
And recall the past of yesterday?
The theater's full; the boxes shine;
Pit and stalls — all boils and hums;
In gallery, impatient line
Claps, and the curtain rising comes.
Resplendent, half-ethereal, light,
Obedient to magic bow's might,
Surrounded by a nymphean crowd,
Istomina stands; she, endowed,
Touches the floor with one foot light,
With other slowly circles round,
And suddenly a leap, a bound,
She flies like down from Aeolus' height;
Now twining, untwining her frame,
Beating quick foot to foot same.
All clap. Onegin enters in,
Walks between chairs on feet in crowd,
A double lorgnette aimed with grin
At boxes of unknown ladies proud;
Gazed at all tiers with sweeping eye,
Saw all: with faces, dress on high
Terribly dissatisfied was he;
With men on all sides bowed free,
Then on the stage in deep distraction
Looked briefly, turned away and yawned,
And said: "Time for replacement dawned;
Ballets I've tolerated in action,
But even Didelot tires me now."
Still cupids, devils, snakes on stage
Jump around and make a noise;
Still weary footmen, in their rage,
Sleep on fur coats in valet poise;
Still they haven't stopped their stamping,
Blowing noses, coughing, clapping;
Still outside and inside bright
Shine the lanterns in the night;
Still horses, freezing, stamp their feet,
Tired of their harness gear,
And coachmen, round the fires near,
Curse masters, beat their hands in heat —
And yet Onegin has gone out;
Home to dress he drives about.
Shall I depict in picture true
The quiet study where the boy,
A model pupil of fashion's view,
Is dressed, undressed, dressed to enjoy?
All that for lavish whim and pleasure
London trades in fancy measure
And over Baltic waves conveys
For timber and tallow our days,
All that in Paris hungry taste,
Choosing useful trade for fun,
Invents for amusements under sun,
For luxury and fashion's haste, —
All adorned the study room
Of the philosopher in eighteen's bloom.
Amber on pipe-stems of Tsargrad,
Porcelain and bronze upon table set,
And, delight of senses pampered, glad,
Perfumes in cut crystal met;
Combs, steel files of various kind,
Straight scissors, curved ones behind,
And thirty kinds of brushes too
For teeth and nails in neat review.
Rousseau (I'll note in passing by)
Could not digest how serious Grimm
Dared clean his nails in front of him,
The eloquent madman high.
Defender of freedom and right
In this case was mistaken quite.
A man can be effective, smart,
And think about his fingernails:
Why contend with time's own art?
Custom's a despot that prevails.
A second Chaadaev, my Eugene,
Fearing jealous judgment mean,
Was a pedant in his attire
And what we'd call a dandy higher.
Three hours at least before the glass
He spent in toilet-room array
And came out like Venus gay,
When dressing in male clothes to pass,
The goddess goes to masquerade.
Having engaged your curious gaze
With toilet in the latest taste,
I could before learned world's amaze
Describe his outfit without haste;
Of course that would be bold to do,
Describing is my business too:
But pantaloons, frock coat, and vest,
These words in Russian aren't expressed;
And I see, confessing to you all,
That my poor style already could
Be far less variegated with foreign wood
Words from alien tongues that fall,
Though I consulted in days old
The Academic Dictionary bold.
That's not our topic now, however:
Let's hasten rather to the ball,
Where in post-chaise rushing clever
My Onegin drove through all.
Before dark houses in a row
Along asleep street's silent glow
Double lanterns of carriages bright
Pour out a cheerful, merry light
And draw rainbows on the snow;
Studded with lamps all around,
Shines a splendid house unbound;
Past solid panes shadows go,
Profiles of heads flicker fast
Of ladies and dandy eccentrics past.
Here our hero reached the porch;
Past the porter like a dart
Flew up marble stairs in torch,
Smoothed his hair with hand apart,
Entered. Hall is full of crowd;
Music tired of thunder loud;
Crowd is with mazurka busy;
Noise and tightness make one dizzy;
Spurs of horse-guards clatter loud;
Fly cute ladies' feet around;
On their captivating track unbound
Fly fiery glances proud,
And drowned by violins' roar
Is jealous whisper of wives on floor.
In days of joy and passionate fire
I was madly fond of balls:
No better place for heart's desire
Or handing letters in grand halls.
O you, respected husbands dear!
I offer you my service here;
Pray take note of what I say:
I wish to warn you on your way.
You mothers, too, more strictly keep
An eye upon your daughters' space:
Hold your lorgnette straight in place!
Or else... God save from trouble deep!
I write all this because, you see,
From sin I have long been free.
Alas, on various delights
I've wasted much of life away!
If morals hadn't suffered blights,
I'd love balls to this very day.
I love wild youth in all its power,
And crowds, and shine, and joyful hour,
And ladies' calculated dress;
I love their feet; though I confess
In all of Russia you will hardly
Find three pairs of shapely feet.
Ah! Long I could not forget, my sweet,
Two feet... Sad, cold, I remember clearly
Their shape, and even in my dream
They agitate my heart supreme.
When and where, in what desert land,
Madman, will you forget those feet?
Ah, feet, small feet! Where do you stand?
Where crush spring flowers soft and sweet?
Nurtured in Eastern luxury's lap,
On northern snow's dismal map
You left no footprints in your flight:
You loved soft carpets' luxurious might
And delicate touch upon the floor.
Was it long ago for you I forgot
Both fame and glory's thirsty lot,
Land of fathers, and exile sore?
Youth's happiness vanished out of sight
Like your light footprint on meadows bright.
Diana's breast, Flora's cheeks
Are charming, dear friends of mine!
Yet Terpsichore's foot, he who seeks,
Is somehow far more divine.
It, prophesying to the glance
Inestimable reward in dance,
Attracts with conditional beauty rare
A willful swarm of desires there.
I love it, friend Elvina, under
The long tablecloth at feast,
In spring on meadow grass at least,
In winter by hearth's iron wonder,
On mirrored parquet of the hall,
By sea on granite rocks and wall.
I remember the sea before the storm:
How I envied waves that rolled
In turbulent sequence, free in form,
To lie at her feet with love untold!
How I wished then with waves to rise
To touch those dear feet with my lips' sighs!
No, never in passionate days of youth
When my blood boiled in earnest truth
Did I desire with such tormenting grace
To kiss lips of young Armida's face,
Or roses of glowing cheeks in fire,
Or breasts full of languid desire;
No, never did passion's surge or art
So tear and torment my soul and heart!
I recall another time and day!
In sacred dreams that gently rise
I hold the happy stirrup's way...
And feel the small foot in my eyes;
Again imagination boils,
Again her touch my heart embroils,
Kindling blood in withered chest,
Again sorrow, again love's quest!..
But enough of praising arrogant fair
With my garrulous lyre's sound;
They are not worth the passion found
Nor songs inspired by them there:
Words and looks of these enchantresses
Are false... as are their foot-caresses.
What of Onegin? Half-asleep
From ball to bed he drives away:
While Petersburg, restless and deep,
Is woken by the drum today.
The merchant rises, peddler goes,
Cabman to exchange now rows,
With pitcher Okhta woman speeds,
Crisp morning snow beneath her treads.
Morning's pleasant noise awoke.
Shutters open; chimney smoke
Rises in a column blue,
And baker, neat German true,
In paper cap, has opened wide
His vas-is-das more than once inside.
But tired by the ball's loud sound
And turning morning into night,
In blissful shade sleeps safe and sound
The child of luxury and delight.
He'll wake past noon, and then again
Till morning life is ready, plain,
Monotonous and colorful, bright.
Tomorrow same as yesterday's light.
But was my Eugene happy indeed,
Free, in the bloom of finest years,
Amidst brilliant triumphs and cheers,
Amidst daily pleasures and feed?
Was he in vain amidst feasts and wealth
Uncautious and in perfect health?
No: early feelings in him cooled;
He grew tired of the world's loud noise;
Beauties no longer his mind ruled
As objects of his usual joys;
Betrayals managed to tire his mind;
Friends and friendship left behind,
Because he could not always pour
Champagne on beefsteaks evermore
And Strasbourg pie, or scatter wit
When his head ached with painful fit;
And though a fiery rake was he,
He lost his love at last, you see,
For brawls, and saber, and lead ball.
A disease whose cause we ought to call
And find out long ago, in truth,
Similar to English spleen, forsooth,
In short: Russian hypochondria's fall
Took hold of him by slow degree;
He didn't try to shoot himself, free,
Thank God, but to life he turned cold.
Like Childe Harold, gloomy, languid, bold
In drawing-rooms he would appear;
Nor scandal's talk, nor boston game,
Nor tender look, nor sigh same,
Nothing touched him or drew near,
He noticed nothing anywhere.
Capricious ladies of high society!
First of all he left your sphere;
And truth to tell, in our propriety
High tone is dull enough, my dear;
Though maybe a lady now and then
Discusses Say and Bentham's pen,
Yet generally their conversation
Is unbearable, innocent botheration;
Besides, they are so chaste and pure,
So grand, so clever, so polite,
So full of piety and right,
So circumspect, so precise, sure,
So inaccessible to men's approach
That their very look brings spleen's reproach.
And you, young beauties, whom late at night
The dashing droshky carries away
Over Petersburg pavement bright,
My Eugene left you too today.
A renegade from stormy pleasure,
Onegin locked himself at home, at leisure,
Yawning, took up a pen to write —
But hard work sickened him outright;
Nothing came from his pen's attempt,
And he didn't join the fiery guild
Of people about whom my judgment's filled
With silence, since I'm not exempt.
And again, given up to idleness drear,
Languishing with soul empty and clear,
He sat down with commendable goal
To adopt another's mind and soul;
Set a row of books on shelf's space,
Read and read, but to no place:
Here boredom, there deception or dread;
In this no conscience, in that no sense instead;
All bound in different chains and ties;
The old is outdated and obsolete,
And the new raving with old repeat.
Like women, he left books behind,
And covered the shelf and dusty family kind
With black mourning taffeta veil.
Having cast off world's burden and gale,
Like him, retired from bustle free,
I made friends with him at that time to be.
I liked his features, his disposition,
Involuntary surrender to dream's vision,
Inimitable strangeness bright,
And sharp, chilled intellect's light.
I was embittered, he was gloomy;
We both knew passion's play and strife;
Both were weary of this life;
In both the heart's heat faded slowly;
Slighted by blind Fortune's hate and men,
Both awaited malice then
At the very morning of our days.
He who has lived and thought inside
Cannot but despise mankind;
He who has felt is haunted, untried,
By ghost of days left far behind:
For him no enchantment remains,
Him the snake of memory pains,
Him repentance gnaws within.
All this often adds a spin
And charm to conversation's flow.
At first Onegin's tongue and word
Confused me; but I soon concurred
And grew accustomed to his sarcastic blow,
To his jests mixed with gall and spite,
And dark epigrams' malicious bite.
How often in summer night's light,
When transparent and clear and bright
Is the night sky over Neva's stream,
And the water's cheerful glass does beam
Not reflecting Diana's face,
Recalling romances of past space,
Recalling former love and cheer,
Sensitive, careless again and dear,
We silently drank the night's sweet breath!
Like a sleeping convict brought to light
From prison into green forest bright,
So we were carried by dreams from death
To the start of young life's early day.
With soul full of regret's display,
And leaning on the granite wall,
Eugene stood thoughtfully through all,
As the poet described himself before.
All was quiet; only night guards' call
Echoed, and distant droshky's fall
Resounded suddenly from Millionnaya street;
Only a boat with oars' rhythmic beat
Swam on the sleeping river wide:
And far away we were charmed inside
By horn and daring song's refrain...
But sweeter amidst night's domain
Is Torquato's stanzas' magic strain!
Adriatic waves, O Brenta! No,
I shall see you yet, I swear,
And full of inspiration's glow
Listen to your magic voice so fair!
It is sacred to Apollo's race;
Through Albion's proud lyre's grace
It's known to me, to my heart dear.
Night's bliss in golden Italy near
I shall enjoy at liberty free,
With a young Venetian maid,
Now talkative, now silent in shade,
Sailing in secret gondola on sea;
With her my lips shall find again
Petrarch's tongue and love's domain.
Will the hour of my freedom arrive?
It's time, it's time! — I call to it;
I wander by sea, wait for weather to fit,
Beckon the sails of ships to drive.
Under storm's robe, with waves in strife,
On sea's free crossroads of my life
When shall I start my course so free?
Time to leave this dull shore to be,
Element hostile to my mind,
And mid southern waves' motion,
Under the sky of my Africa's ocean,
Sigh for gloomy Russia left behind,
Where I suffered, where I loved before,
Where I buried my heart evermore.
Onegin was ready to travel with me
To foreign lands across the sea;
But soon by fate's decreed design
We were separated for a long time.
His father died just at that date.
Before Onegin gathered straight
A greedy troop of creditors.
Each had his mind and logic's cause:
Eugene, hating lawsuits and strife,
Content with his appointed life,
Surrendered the inheritance to them,
Seeing no great loss in that gem,
Or foreseeing from afar
The death of his uncle, old tsar.
Suddenly he received indeed
A report from manager in speed
That his uncle lay on deathbed near
And wished to say farewell to his dear.
Having read the mournful line,
Eugene started out in time,
Flew by post-chaise without delay
And yawned beforehand on the way,
Preparing, for the sake of cash,
For sighs, boredom, and deceit trash
(And thus I began my novel's art);
But reaching uncle's village part,
He found him on the table laid,
As ready tribute to earth paid.
He found the yard full of servants' crowd;
To the deceased from all around
Came foes and friends with solemn sound,
Lovers of funerals loud.
They buried the dead man with grace.
Priests and guests ate, drank in place,
And then solemnly parted away,
As if they had done business today.
Here is our Onegin — country dweller,
Master of mills, waters, woods, cellar,
Full owner of land, who until now
Was enemy of order, spender anyhow,
And very glad that his former track
Was changed for something new aback.
For two days new to him appeared
The lonely fields, the woods endeared,
Coolness of dark oak grove around,
Murmur of quiet streamlet's sound;
On the third day grove, hill, and field
No longer any charm could yield;
Then they induced a sleepy trance;
Then he saw clearly at a glance
That in the village boredom's the same,
Though no streets, palaces, or game,
No cards, no balls, no poetry lines.
Hypochondria stood on guard in designs,
Running after him through life,
Like a shadow or faithful wife.
I was born for peaceful life and rest,
For country quiet, calm and blest;
In wilderness lyre's voice sounds clear,
Creative dreams are livelier here.
Devoting to innocent leisure my days,
I wander by desert lake's ways,
And 'far niente' is my law.
Every morning I wake with awe
To sweet bliss and freedom bright:
Read little, sleep long in night,
Do not catch flying fame's illusion.
Was it not thus in past seclusion
I spent in idleness and shade
My happiest days that were made?
Flowers, love, village, idleness,
Fields! I am yours in soul's address.
I'm always glad to note the difference
Between Onegin and my own presence,
Lest a sneering reader bold
Or some publisher of slander told,
Comparing my features here,
Should repeat ungodly and severe
That I painted my own portrait clear,
Like Byron, poet of pride and cheer,
As if it were impossible for us
To write poems about others thus,
Except about ourselves alone.
I'll note in passing: poets all
Are friends to dreamful love's call.
It used to be that objects dear
I dreamed of, and my soul held clear
Their secret image in its keep;
Later the muse revived them from sleep:
Thus, careless, I sang in my rhymes
The mountain maid of ancient times,
And captives of Salgir's fair shore.
Now from you, my friends, once more
I often hear a question raised:
"For whom does your lyre sigh praised?
To whom, amidst jealous maidens' throng,
Have you dedicated its sweet song?
"Whose gaze, inspiring your art,
Rewarded with tender caress your heart
And your thoughtful singing tone?
Whom has your verse idolized alone?"
And, friends, no one, by God, I say!
Love's mad anxiety and fray
I experienced without relief.
Blest is he who joined to his grief
The fever of rhymes: he doubled thereby
Poetry's sacred frenzy high,
Following Petrarch's path ahead,
And calmed his heart's torment instead,
Catching fame along the way;
But I, loving, was dumb and foolish prey.
Love passed, the muse appeared in sight,
And my dark mind became clear and bright.
Free, again I seek union true
Of magic sounds, feelings, thoughts new;
I write, and my heart doesn't grieve,
My pen, forgetting, doesn't weave
Near unfinished verses on the page
Women's feet or heads of the age;
Extinguished ashes won't flare again,
I still mourn, but tears don't remain,
And soon, soon storm's trace inside
In my soul will completely subside:
Then I shall begin to write a poem
